README.md, before:

# MultiBisect.jl

[![Build Status](https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-stable-blue.svg)](https://jbshannon.github.io/MultiBisect.jl/stable)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-dev-blue.svg)](https://jbshannon.github.io/MultiBisect.jl/dev)


This Julia package provides a lightweight, idiomatic implementation of the [bisection method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bisection_method) of root-finding in an arbitrary number of dimensions, which can be used to find level curves or other higher-dimensional isosurfaces of a function with fewer evaluations.

This package exports the `BisectionGrid` type, which tracks an `N`-dimensional bisection with only three `Array{Bool, N}`s and one `NTuple{N, R <: AbstractRange}`. Using ordinary boolean arrays not only uses minimal memory, but also leverages the magic of base Julia's `CartesianIndices` to handle any number of dimensions without code modification.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This package, while functional, is still experimental and subject to change. For a more mature package with similar functionality, see [MDBM.jl](https://github.com/bachrathyd/MDBM.jl)

## Installation

This package is now registered, so installation is available from the `pkg>` prompt:

```julia
pkg> add MultiBisect
```

or in a script:

```julia
import Pkg; Pkg.add("MultiBisect")
```

## Overview

The task of finding the root of a continuous function on an interval where its sign is known to change is a relatively well-known and simple problem, but extending the method to handle two or more dimensions adds complexity. For example, consider the unit circle on the domain $[0,1]^2$.

```julia
f(z) = 1 - sum(abs2, z)
circle = map(t -> (cos(t), sin(t)), 0:0.01:π/2)

using CairoMakie
fig = Figure(resolution = (500, 500))
ax = Axis(fig[1, 1])
lines!(ax, circle; color=:black)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle1.svg)

### The Problem

The naive, brute-force approach would be to evaluate the function on a grid of points, but many of these evaluations would be far away from the root (in two dimensions, a zero level curve) and not provide any information about the shape of the level curve.

```julia
xs = range(0, 1, length=65)
XS = Iterators.product(xs, xs) |> collect
F = f.(XS)

scatter!(ax, XS[F .> 0]; markersize=3)
scatter!(ax, XS[F .≤ 0]; markersize=3)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle2.svg)

The level curve must lie between the positive points and the negative points. Two adjacent points that share the same sign do not tell us anything about the level curve, so we could improve our efficiency if we avoided evaluating the function in regions where the sign does not appear to change.

### Bisection

Using the bisection method, we can reduce the number of function evaluations by increasing the fineness of the grid only in places we know the function must change sign. This package provides the function `bisect(f, grid)`, which applies the algorithm iteratively to the `grid` using the function `f`:

```julia
using MultiBisect
BG = bisect(f, (0.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0); iterations=7)
posx, negx = splitsign(BG)

fig = Figure(resolution = (500, 500))
ax = Axis(fig[1, 1])
lines!(ax, circle; color=:black)
scatter!(ax, posx; markersize=3)
scatter!(ax, negx; markersize=3)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle3.svg)

The resulting grid is the same size and identifies the exact same sign changes as before, but with far fewer function evaluations – nearly 90% fewer!

```julia
julia> BG
BisectionGrid{Float64, 2}
       Domain: (0.0:0.015625:1.0, 0.0:0.015625:1.0)
  Grid points: 4225
  Evaluations: 490


julia> (xs, xs) == domain(BG)
true

julia> efficiency(BG) # percentage of gridpoints not evaluated
0.8840236686390532
```

This efficiency gain is possible because we known that if a square in the grid has vertices that are not all the same sign, the function must change sign somewhere within the square (this is of course only a necessary and not a sufficient condition). The method proceeds by dividing an initial grid "in half" (in the multidimensional sense) at each stage. Since we are working in two dimensions, we break each square into four smaller squares. Before evaluating the function, we check the sign of the function at the vertices of the larger square. If the function does not change sign, there is no need to evaluate the function within the square. By discarding squares whose vertices all share the same sign at each iteration, we avoid uninformative function evaluations. Here is a step-by-step view of the algorithm:

https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/assets/46204520/f4fa8893-f073-40f7-8907-84308b91cc65

### Interpolation

Once we're satisfied we have enough information about where the function changes signs, we need to convert that information into actual points along the curve. This package examines the *edges* of the grid: two adjacent points with opposite signs. 

```julia
julia> edges(BG)
128-element Vector{Tuple{Tuple{Float64, Float64}, Tuple{Float64, Float64}}}:
 ((0.984375, 0.0), (1.0, 0.0))
 ((0.984375, 0.015625), (1.0, 0.015625))
 ((0.984375, 0.03125), (1.0, 0.03125))
 ((0.984375, 0.046875), (1.0, 0.046875))
 ((0.984375, 0.0625), (1.0, 0.0625))
 ⋮
 ((0.125, 0.984375), (0.125, 1.0))
 ((0.140625, 0.984375), (0.140625, 1.0))
 ((0.15625, 0.984375), (0.15625, 1.0))
 ((0.171875, 0.984375), (0.1875, 0.984375))
 ((0.171875, 0.984375), (0.171875, 1.0))
```

Since an edge is one-dimensional, we can convert the multidimensional root-finding problem to a series of one-dimensional problems. This packages provides the function `interpolate(rootfinder, BG)`, which takes a function `rootfinder` – taking an edge as input and returning a root as output – and applies it to each edge in the grid `BG`. This package currently provides three root-finders for convenience:

- `edgeroot`: solve for the root on the edge with a call to `Roots.find_zero`
- `linearroot`: create a linear interpolation of the function through the two edge points and compute its root
- `marchingsquares`: return the midpoint of the edge

Here is a visual comparison of these different interpolation methods:

![](docs/src/images/README/interpolations.svg)

When function evaluations are very expensive, `interpolate` can be called without a `rootfinder` argument to use the linear approximation method with saved function evaluations from the bisection process.

### More dimensions!

Since Julia has the magical `CartesianIndices` iterator, translating this process out of two dimensions is as simple as changing the dimension of the initial evaluation grid. Here is an example finding roots of the 5D unit hypersphere over the 5D unit hypercube:

```julia
julia> grid = ntuple(i -> (0.0:1.0), 5)
(0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0)

julia> BG5 = bisect(f, grid)
BisectionGrid{Float64, 5}
       Domain: (0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0)
  Grid points: 1419857
  Evaluations: 396246

julia> interpolate(linearroot(f), BG5)
124020-element Vector{NTuple{5, Float64}}:
 (1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9979838709677419, 0.0625, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9919354838709677, 0.125, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9818548387096774, 0.1875, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.967741935483871, 0.25, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 ⋮
 (0.0625, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.08333333333333333, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.1375, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3181818181818182, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9395161290322581)
```

Commit message:

Update README.md and documentation for zero detection API
- Update BisectionGrid description to reflect Tuple{Bool, Bool} sign array
- Add new Zero Detection section explaining 4-state tuple system
- Document helper functions: ispositivesign, isnegativesign, iszerosign, isevaluated
- Update splitsign documentation to clarify zero values are excluded
- Explain benefits for precise level curve detection with zero-adjacent edges
- All helper functions verified to work as documented

README.md, after:

# MultiBisect.jl

[![Build Status](https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml?query=branch%3Amain)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-stable-blue.svg)](https://jbshannon.github.io/MultiBisect.jl/stable)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-dev-blue.svg)](https://jbshannon.github.io/MultiBisect.jl/dev)


This Julia package provides a lightweight, idiomatic implementation of the [bisection method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bisection_method) of root-finding in an arbitrary number of dimensions, which can be used to find level curves or other higher-dimensional isosurfaces of a function with fewer evaluations.

This package exports the `BisectionGrid` type, which tracks an `N`-dimensional bisection with `Array{Tuple{Bool, Bool}, N}` for sign tracking, three `Array{Bool, N}`s for state management, and one `NTuple{N, R <: AbstractRange}`. The sign array uses a 4-state tuple system: `(true, true)` for unevaluated points, `(true, false)` for positive values, `(false, true)` for negative values, and `(false, false)` for zero values. This enables precise detection of level curves where function evaluations are exactly zero.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This package, while functional, is still experimental and subject to change. For a more mature package with similar functionality, see [MDBM.jl](https://github.com/bachrathyd/MDBM.jl)

## Installation

This package is now registered, so installation is available from the `pkg>` prompt:

```julia
pkg> add MultiBisect
```

or in a script:

```julia
import Pkg; Pkg.add("MultiBisect")
```

## Overview

The task of finding the root of a continuous function on an interval where its sign is known to change is a relatively well-known and simple problem, but extending the method to handle two or more dimensions adds complexity. For example, consider the unit circle on the domain $[0,1]^2$.

```julia
f(z) = 1 - sum(abs2, z)
circle = map(t -> (cos(t), sin(t)), 0:0.01:π/2)

using CairoMakie
fig = Figure(resolution = (500, 500))
ax = Axis(fig[1, 1])
lines!(ax, circle; color=:black)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle1.svg)

### The Problem

The naive, brute-force approach would be to evaluate the function on a grid of points, but many of these evaluations would be far away from the root (in two dimensions, a zero level curve) and not provide any information about the shape of the level curve.

```julia
xs = range(0, 1, length=65)
XS = Iterators.product(xs, xs) |> collect
F = f.(XS)

scatter!(ax, XS[F .> 0]; markersize=3)
scatter!(ax, XS[F .≤ 0]; markersize=3)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle2.svg)

The level curve must lie between the positive points and the negative points. Two adjacent points that share the same sign do not tell us anything about the level curve, so we could improve our efficiency if we avoided evaluating the function in regions where the sign does not appear to change.

### Bisection

Using the bisection method, we can reduce the number of function evaluations by increasing the fineness of the grid only in places we know the function must change sign. This package provides the function `bisect(f, grid)`, which applies the algorithm iteratively to the `grid` using the function `f`:

```julia
using MultiBisect
BG = bisect(f, (0.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0); iterations=7)
posx, negx = splitsign(BG)

fig = Figure(resolution = (500, 500))
ax = Axis(fig[1, 1])
lines!(ax, circle; color=:black)
scatter!(ax, posx; markersize=3)
scatter!(ax, negx; markersize=3)
fig
```
![](docs/src/images/README/circle3.svg)

The resulting grid is the same size and identifies the exact same sign changes as before, but with far fewer function evaluations – nearly 90% fewer!

```julia
julia> BG
BisectionGrid{Float64, 2}
       Domain: (0.0:0.015625:1.0, 0.0:0.015625:1.0)
  Grid points: 4225
  Evaluations: 490


julia> (xs, xs) == domain(BG)
true

julia> efficiency(BG) # percentage of gridpoints not evaluated
0.8840236686390532
```

### Zero Detection

A key feature of this implementation is precise zero detection. The sign array tracks four distinct states using `Tuple{Bool, Bool}`:

```julia
using MultiBisect

# Helper functions to check sign states
ispositivesign(sign::Tuple{Bool, Bool}) # Returns true for (true, false)
isnegativesign(sign::Tuple{Bool, Bool}) # Returns true for (false, true)  
iszerosign(sign::Tuple{Bool, Bool})   # Returns true for (false, false)
isevaluated(sign::Tuple{Bool, Bool}) # Returns true for anything except (true, true)
```

This enables the algorithm to detect when function evaluations are exactly zero, which is crucial for accurate level curve detection. Zero-adjacent edges are properly identified in the edge detection process, ensuring that points exactly on the level curve are included in the interpolation step.

This efficiency gain is possible because we know that if a square in the grid has vertices that are not all the same sign, the function must change sign somewhere within the square (this is of course only a necessary and not a sufficient condition). The method proceeds by dividing an initial grid "in half" (in the multidimensional sense) at each stage. Since we are working in two dimensions, we break each square into four smaller squares. Before evaluating the function, we check the sign of the function at the vertices of the larger square. If the function does not change sign, there is no need to evaluate the function within the square. By discarding squares whose vertices all share the same sign at each iteration, we avoid uninformative function evaluations. Here is a step-by-step view of the algorithm:

https://github.com/jbshannon/MultiBisect.jl/assets/46204520/f4fa8893-f073-40f7-8907-84308b91cc65

### Interpolation

Once we're satisfied we have enough information about where the function changes signs, we need to convert that information into actual points along the curve. This package examines the *edges* of the grid: two adjacent points with opposite signs. 

```julia
julia> edges(BG)
128-element Vector{Tuple{Tuple{Float64, Float64}, Tuple{Float64, Float64}}}:
 ((0.984375, 0.0), (1.0, 0.0))
 ((0.984375, 0.015625), (1.0, 0.015625))
 ((0.984375, 0.03125), (1.0, 0.03125))
 ((0.984375, 0.046875), (1.0, 0.046875))
 ((0.984375, 0.0625), (1.0, 0.0625))
 ⋮
 ((0.125, 0.984375), (0.125, 1.0))
 ((0.140625, 0.984375), (0.140625, 1.0))
 ((0.15625, 0.984375), (0.15625, 1.0))
 ((0.171875, 0.984375), (0.1875, 0.984375))
 ((0.171875, 0.984375), (0.171875, 1.0))
```

Since an edge is one-dimensional, we can convert the multidimensional root-finding problem to a series of one-dimensional problems. This packages provides the function `interpolate(rootfinder, BG)`, which takes a function `rootfinder` – taking an edge as input and returning a root as output – and applies it to each edge in the grid `BG`. This package currently provides three root-finders for convenience:

- `edgeroot`: solve for the root on the edge with a call to `Roots.find_zero`
- `linearroot`: create a linear interpolation of the function through the two edge points and compute its root
- `marchingsquares`: return the midpoint of the edge

Here is a visual comparison of these different interpolation methods:

![](docs/src/images/README/interpolations.svg)

When function evaluations are very expensive, `interpolate` can be called without a `rootfinder` argument to use the linear approximation method with saved function evaluations from the bisection process.

### More dimensions!

Since Julia has the magical `CartesianIndices` iterator, translating this process out of two dimensions is as simple as changing the dimension of the initial evaluation grid. Here is an example finding roots of the 5D unit hypersphere over the 5D unit hypercube:

```julia
julia> grid = ntuple(i -> (0.0:1.0), 5)
(0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0, 0.0:1.0:1.0)

julia> BG5 = bisect(f, grid)
BisectionGrid{Float64, 5}
       Domain: (0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0, 0.0:0.0625:1.0)
  Grid points: 1419857
  Evaluations: 396246

julia> interpolate(linearroot(f), BG5)
124020-element Vector{NTuple{5, Float64}}:
 (1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9979838709677419, 0.0625, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9919354838709677, 0.125, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.9818548387096774, 0.1875, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 (0.967741935483871, 0.25, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0)
 ⋮
 (0.0625, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.08333333333333333, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.1375, 0.3125, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3181818181818182, 0.9375)
 (0.0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.3125, 0.9395161290322581)
```
